# Non-Prescribed Hormone Use and Barriers to Care for Transgender Women in San Francisco

Haan, G. de; Santos, G.-M.; Arayasirikul, S.; Raymond, H. F. Non-Prescribed Hormone Use and Barriers to Care for Transgender Women in San Francisco. _LGBT Health_ **2015**, _2_ (4), 313–323. [https://doi.org/10.1089/lgbt.2014.0128](https://doi.org/10.1089/lgbt.2014.0128).

#### Abstract

> "Inconsistent access to healthcare represents a barrier to transgender patients receiving hormone therapy through a licensed provider. Inability to access care leads many transgender people to buy hormones from unlicensed sources and transition without medical supervision. Little is known about the factors predisposing people to rely on this method of transition. It is critical to understand what leads to non-prescribed hormone use to better support safe medical transitions for transgender people." ([Haan et al 2015:313](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/F7TUU4SF?page=1))

> "We conducted an analysis of a study with 314 transwomen in San Francisco from August-December 2010, using Respondent Driven Sampling (RDS)" ([Haan et al 2015:313](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/F7TUU4SF?page=1))

> "Data demonstrate that 68.7% of transwomen were currently on hormone replacement therapy (HRT) but only 41% reported being on hormones consistently. In addition, 49.1% reported taking hormones for HRT not prescribed by a clinician" ([Haan et al 2015:313](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/F7TUU4SF?page=1))

> "Consistent hormone use was independently and positively associated with being born in the United States, having contact with a health care provider" ([Haan et al 2015:313](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/F7TUU4SF?page=1))

> "Those who reported ever being forced to have sex or having been raped had 60% lower odds of being consistently on hormones" ([Haan et al 2015:313](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/F7TUU4SF?page=1))

> "We found greater odds of non-prescribed hormone use among participants who had gender confirmation surgery and among those who had experienced verbal abuse due to their gender identity and presentation" ([Haan et al 2015:313](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/F7TUU4SF?page=1))

> "As medical transition (i.e., physical changes accomplished through hormonal and surgical treatment) is a very important component of many transgender people's lives and survival (as is evident by our finding that 94% of transwomen in this study reported ever taking hormones), it is not uncommon for transgender individuals to turn to their communities or underground pharmaceutical dealers for medical resources when medical professionals are inaccessible or unsupportive.6-9" ([Haan et al 2015:314](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/F7TUU4SF?page=2))

> "However, it is unclear whether these demographic, behavioral, and trauma-related factors influence transgender people's use of non-prescribed hormones, adherence to hormones inconsistently, needle sharing behavior for hormone injection, and injection of illicit silicone or "filler" use for body modification.15" ([Haan et al 2015:314](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/F7TUU4SF?page=2))

> "If patients do not receive an initial assessment by a health care provider and are taking inappropriately high hormone doses, there is clearly a possibility for a higher incidence of adverse outcomes. In addition, spironolactone (used by some transwomen as an androgen blocker) can lead to life-threatening hyperkalemia, especially if combined with other common medications.18" ([Haan et al 2015:314](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/F7TUU4SF?page=2))

#### Methods

> "In brief, individuals at least 18 years of age who identified as transwomen and reported living in San Francisco were eligible for the study. Initially, the study recruited 11 ethnically/racially diverse "seeds"—the first group of participants who initiated peer-based RDS recruitment. Seeds and enrolled participants received coupons (3-5 each) to recruit, through word of mouth, other transwomen into the study from their respective networks. The coupon return rate was 36.8%. Transwomen who enrolled in the study received a $50 stipend. In addition, participants received an additional $10 stipend for each network referral enrolled in the study. Among the 318 transwomen who were screened for eligibility, 95.3% were deemed eligible and agreed to participate. This study reached sample stability in key variables and satisfied other ideal RDS criteria.21,22 For example, the study had many long recruitment chains (mean recruitment wave= 6; range= 1-15) and generally moderate homophily with respect to race/ethnicity (range= 0.15-0.63). Information from a formative assessment suggested that networks of transwomen in San Francisco are strongly race/ethnicity based and this would play a key role in the sampling of diverse transwomen—thus, stability and equilibrium were evaluated with respect to race/ethnicity. The study reached equilibrium by the seventh wave of recruitment.11" ([Haan et al 2015:314](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/F7TUU4SF?page=2))

> "Ever Taken Hormones 292 93.0" ([Haan et al 2015:316](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/F7TUU4SF?page=4))

> "Progesterone 29 9.2" ([Haan et al 2015:316](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/F7TUU4SF?page=4))

> "Ever Taken Hormones Not Prescribed 171 54.5" ([Haan et al 2015:316](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/F7TUU4SF?page=4))

> "Reasons Participants Took Hormones Not Prescribed" ([Haan et al 2015:316](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/F7TUU4SF?page=4))

> "However, those who reported ever being forced to have sex or having been raped had 60% lower odds of being consistently on hormones (aOR 0.45; 95% CI= 0.24-0.84), compared to those who did not experience forced sex" ([Haan et al 2015:316](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/F7TUU4SF?page=4))

> "In addition, we found greater odds of ever having nonprescribed hormone use among participants who had gender confirmation surgery (aOR 3.25; 95% CI= 1.48-7.15), and among those had experienced verbal abuse due to their gender identity and presentation (aOR 3.34; 95% CI= 1.50- 7.45), while adjusting for age, income and HIV-status (see Table 4)." ([Haan et al 2015:316](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/F7TUU4SF?page=4))

> "In this study, we found 49.1% of transwomen reported taking hormones not prescribed by a doctor. The main reasons they cited were not being able to see a provider (35.5%) and wanting a quicker transition than they felt would be accomplished through a healthcare professional (12%). These two variables therefore represent possibilities for intervention and hopefully prevention of non-prescribed hormone use" ([Haan et al 2015:316](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/F7TUU4SF?page=4))

> "The positive correlation between being born in the United States and consistent hormone use perhaps also raises more questions than answers. This relationship may represent language barriers, cultural barriers, lack of insurance especially for undocumented people, or any combination of these factors and others." ([Haan et al 2015:321](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/F7TUU4SF?page=9))

> "We found in this study that transwomen who experienced rape had 60% lower odds of being on consistent hormones and those who had experienced verbal abuse had an increased risk for taking hormones not prescribed by a doctor (aOR 3.34). For many transgender people, the threat of violence increases if they are not fully "passing" as the gender with which they identify. While this is certainly not the case for every transgender-identified individual, for some transgender people, being readily identifiable as a gender non-conforming person may represent a significant safety threat.29" ([Haan et al 2015:321](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/F7TUU4SF?page=9))

> "Furthermore, the link between physical violence and depression in transgender communities has been well described.30 The increased risk of inconsistent hormones use by transwomen who have experienced rape may represent a generalized difficulty with adhering to medication regimens while clinically depressed." ([Haan et al 2015:321](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/F7TUU4SF?page=9))

> "Employment discrimination also represents a risk factor for taking hormones not prescribed by a provider. In a bivariate analysis, women who reported problems getting a job due to their gender presentation were more likely to have used non-prescribed hormones (OR 1.99). College education was protective against inconsistent hormone use (OR 1.98 for women with some college education). Disparities in employment and education resulting from institutionalized anti-transgender attitudes (lack of protection and active discrimination of transgender people at institutional and governmental levels) can clearly result in a myriad of barriers to medically supervised transition" ([Haan et al 2015:321](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/F7TUU4SF?page=9))

> "Our study has several limitations. The circumstances in these women's lives that lead them to find hormones from unlicensed sources and engage in sporadic hormone use are likely multifactorial and deeply complex. Moreover, the parent study did not assess reasons why participants are currently not on hormones. The lack of a clear definition of consistent hormones use in the original study tool also represents a limitation. Consistent hormone use may be defined very differently by any given study participant and, therefore, this discrete group identified in the study may be quite heterogeneous with vastly different factors affecting their use of hormones." ([Haan et al 2015:321](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/F7TUU4SF?page=9))

#### 6. Gooren LJ, Sungkaew T, Giltay EJ: Exploration of functional health, mental well-being and cross-sex hormone use in a sample of Thai male-to-female transgendered persons (kathoeys). Asian J Androl 2013;15:280-285. 7. Poteat T, German D, Kerrigan D: Managing uncertainty: A grounded theory of stigma in transgender health care encounters. Soc Sci Med 2013;84:22-29.

